Is automated irrigation within the reach of a tech-savvy gardener, farmer, or researcher? This project was undertaken to explore the feasibility of automated irrigation controlled with an inexpensive $5 to $15 USD [capacitive soil moisture sensor](https://www.digikey.com/en/products/detail/dfrobot/SEN0193/6588605) connected to an [Arduino Nano](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07G99NNXL/ref=sspa_dk_detail_0?psc=1&pd_rd_i=B07G99NNXL&pd_rd_w=93ej7&content-id=amzn1.sym.386c274b-4bfe-4421-9052-a1a56db557ab&pf_rd_p=386c274b-4bfe-4421-9052-a1a56db557ab&pf_rd_r=D43HB0071WQN1YQWWBES&pd_rd_wg=hMQO5&pd_rd_r=2c1c8652-56ad-47d5-96a9-a8772ff30c36&s=pc&sp_csd=d2lkZ2V0TmFtZT1zcF9kZXRhaWxfdGhlbWF0aWM) microcontroller. This has implications for growing high value crops in containers or raised beds that can dry out quickly or in situations where regular monitoring is difficult.

A capacitive soil moisture was placed into a short piece of PVC to protect the electronics from water, allowing the sensor to be burried in an outdoor pot. A normally closed soleonoid valve connected to a water source via PVC or polypipe is turned on (opened) by the microcontroller if the soil moisture sensor reading indicates that the soil is dry. In this setup, the microcontroller spends most of the time in low-power sleep mode to conserve battery power. Every two hours (adjustable in the code), the microcontroller wakes up, checks the soil moisture, turns on for 30 seconds (also adjustable in code) if the reading is dry, and then goes back to sleep. The soil moisture reading is an average of three readings, with anomalies thrown out to minimize the possibility of flooding due to false readings.
 
